FACULTY OF INFORMATICS
Implementation of a python library
for provenance
Bachelor’s Thesis
ROLAND OLEJNÍK
Brno, Spring 2024
FACULTY OF INFORMATICS
Implementation of a python library
for provenance
Bachelor’s Thesis
ROLAND OLEJNÍK
Advisor: RNDr. Rudolf Wittner
Department of Computer Systems and Communications
Brno, Spring 2024
Declaration
Hereby I declare that this paper is my original authorial work, which
I have worked out on my own. All sources, references, and literature
used or excerpted during elaboration of this work are properly cited
and listed in complete reference to the due source.
Roland Olejník
Advisor: RNDr. Rudolf Wittner
iii
Acknowledgements
My acknowledgment and thanks go to RNDr. Rudolf Wittner for
devoting his time to guide me throughout this bachelor thesis.
iv
Abstract
The purpose of this bachelor thesis is to design and implement a provenance library in Python and also compare the current design of the
existing provenance library with that of this thesis. The thesis is divided into three parts. The theoretical part mainly aims to explain the
basics of provenance, the W3C provenance standard, the provenance
data model, and the different types of constraints used in provenance.
The second part focuses on the design of the library, what functionality
it provides, and an analysis of the existing library implemented in
Python with a subsequent comparison with the library implemented
as a part of this thesis. The implementation part shows its representation in Python, how the library can be used, and different test cases
used in testing the library.
Keywords
provenance, W3C PROV, library, Python
v
Contents
Introduction 1
1 Introduction to provenance 2
1.1 W3C provenance standard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.1.1 Defined terms used in PROV . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.2 PROV data model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
1.2.1 Provenance as a graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
1.2.2 Categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
1.2.3 Entities/Activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
1.2.4 Derivations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.2.5 Agents, Responsibility, and Influence . . . . . . 10
1.2.6 Bundles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
1.2.7 Alternates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
1.2.8 Collections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
1.2.9 Example of a provenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2 Design of the library 15
2.1 Analysis of prov 2.0.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.1.1 ProvBundle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.1.2 ProvDocument . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.1.3 ProvRecord . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.1.4 ProvElement and ProvRelation . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.1.5 Specific provenance records . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.1.6 Disadvantages of prov 2.0.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.2 Use cases of the library . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.3 Classes of the library . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.3.1 ProvDocument . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.3.2 Bundle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.3.3 NamespaceDeclaration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.3.4 Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.3.5 Provenance structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.4 Usage of strategy design pattern in the library . . . . . 25
2.5 Differences with the prov 2.0.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3 Implementation of the library 28
3.1 Realisation of the design in Python . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
vi
3.1.1 Abstract classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.1.2 Interfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.1.3 Provenance structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.1.4 Checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.1.5 Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.1.6 Usage of the library . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.2 Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4 Conclusion 33
Bibliography 34
A An appendix 35
vii
List of Figures
1.1 Simplified example of relationships and types of structures in a high-level schema of data model [2] . . . . . . . 7
2.1 Use case diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.2 Simplified class diagram of the main part of the library
(excluding checks, constraints, and interfaces) . . . . . . . 24
2.3 Simplified class diagram of the strategy design pattern
used for constraints with an example of a strategy and a
constraint class . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
viii
Introduction
Provenance is information about objects involved in producing a piece
of data or thing, which can be used to form assessments about its quality, reliability, or trustworthiness [1]. Provenance can be represented
even for entities, activities, and people that are not represented in a
digital form.
This thesis is about designing and implementing a provenance
library, named ProvGraphLib, that supports basic functionality so
that users wanting to create a provenance of an object could use it
with ease. Great emphasis is placed on the unit tests which test various
parts of the library.
The thesis is divided into three parts. The theoretical part mainly
aims to explain the W3C standard for provenance representation. The
second part focuses on the design of the library and an analysis of the
existing provenance Python library with a subsequent comparison
of ProvGraphLib to the same existing library. The implementation
part shows its implementation in Python and how the functionality is
tested.
The result of this bachelor thesis is a functional and properly tested
provenance library that users can use to create, retrieve, update, and
delete provenance structures or records implemented by the library.
1
1 Introduction to provenance
Provenance is information about creation, changes, authors, and other
influences or objects that modified the object or were a part of its
creation.
1.1 W3C provenance standard
The provenance standard made by the W3C, named PROV, defines
rules for provenance representation and serialization. PROV standard
is composed of numerous documents, each of them defining a different
part of the standard. In this thesis, only a part of these documents will
be covered as not all of them relevantly influenced the implementation
of the library. Documents applied by the implementation part in this
thesis are:
• PROV-OVERVIEW [1] - overview of the documents in PROV
• PROV-PRIMER [2] - introduction into the PROV standard and
simplified overview of its data model
• PROV-DM [3] - detailed specification of PROV data model
• PROV-N [4] - notation of the PROV aimed at human readability
and serialization
• PROV-CONSTRAINTS [5] - describes inferences and constraints
used in the PROV standard
1.1.1 Defined terms used in PROV
PROV standard defines many different terms that are used in documents defining the standard. This subsection explains the terms used
in this thesis.
Provenance structure
Provenance structures are elements defined by the PROV data model
representing objects and relationships in provenance. They must fully
2
1. Introduction to provenance
define the mandatory properties of the part of the provenance they
are supposed to represent. There are different types of structures,
some are represented in a graph as vertices, while others are represented as edges. A provenance structure might be expressed by one
or more provenance records and they must fulfill all requirements
of the specific type of record. An example of a provenance statement
representing a provenance structure can be written as follows:
entity(id, [prov:type="book", ex:version="4"])
Provenance record
Provenance records represent, fully or partially, an object or a relationship they are supposed to represent in provenance. One or more
records can be a part of a provenance structure and their allegiance
to a certain structure is determined by their identifier. Provenance
statements that follow are an example of two records representing the
same structure written in the previous example:
entity(id, [prov:type="book"])
entity(id, [ex:version="4"])
Merge
Merging of numerous provenance records combines their properties
and attributes into a single record of the same type. Merges are based
on identifiers of records as they identify the provenance structure they
are a part of. Properties of provenance records must not be contradictory otherwise their merge is not possible.
Type of provenance structure
Type of provenance structure is a specification of a provenance structure detailing information about its role in a provenance graph. It gives
more context to an object or a relationship a structure is representing.
Provenance document
A provenance document is a part of provenance where all of its objects
are stored, including namespaces, bundles, and definitions of prove3
1. Introduction to provenance
nance structures. A provenance document is a part of the metadata
various entities can contain.
Namespace
Namespace is identified with a Uniform Resource Identifier, also
known as URI, inside a Provenance document. Namespaces are declared in a part of a provenance document called namespace declaration. Inside of namespace declaration, namespaces are also mapped
to prefixes, which could be understood as a sort of variable that we
can use to express a certain namespace without having to write the
whole URI.
Qualified name
A qualified name is a form of identifying provenance structures or
their attributes. It consists of a prefix and a local part. Prefix is a way
to declare a URI without having to write its full notation and instead
using a prefix stated in a namespace declaration, while the local part
is a specific part of a qualified name that extends the URI represented
by the prefix.
Identifiers
An identifier is a form of identifying provenance structures and provenance records as a part of the same structure. Identifiers are expressed
through qualified names.
Attributes
Attributes are a way to provide more details and context to a provenance structure. Each type of structure (with some exceptions) contains a list of attributes. The attribute itself is a qualified name, although in the context of provenance structure attributes, they consist
of the attribute itself and its value, which is represented through a
string.
4
1. Introduction to provenance
Constraints
Constraints are a set of logical rules that must be fulfilled from the
point of provenance structures for the provenance they represent to
be logically correct. The constraints themselves are defined in the
PROV-CONSTRAINTS [5] document of the PROV standard.
There are different types of constraints, one of them is a group of
event ordering constraints that define a logical order of sequence of
events, and for example, if an entity was not invalidated sooner than it
was generated. Other examples of constraint types are key constraints
defining identifier as a key for a provenance structure [5].
Other parts of the PROV-CONSTRAINTS [5] document are definitions and inferences. Definitions are a set of rules that can be used to
substitute provenance statements with other statements that do not
alter the meaning of the provenance expression. One such example of
the usage of a definition is omitting an empty list of attributes in an entity, therefore entity(identifier) has the same meaning as entity(identifier,
[]).
Inferences are a set of rules that can be applied to provenance statements to imply the existence of other provenance statements that may
or may not be explicitly stated, for example existence of expressions
alternate(e1,e2) and alternate(e2,e3) implies that alternate(e1,e3) also
exists, although possibly not explicitly stated.
Constraints, inferences, and definitions are used as a part of the
normalization and validation process of provenance expressions as
defined in PROV-CONSTRAINTS [5]. Normalization is a process of
"applying all definitions, inferences, and uniqueness constraints" [5]
to provenance statements. The normalization can fail in the event
that some constraints used in normalization are not fulfilled. After
successful normalization, the expressions are in their normal form.
Validation on the other hand is a process of not only applying
definitions, inferences, and a subset of constraints but also applying
the rest of the constraints not used in the normalization process.
1.2 PROV data model
PROV data model is a data model forming a basis for the W3C provenance family of specifications [3].
5
1. Introduction to provenance
PROV-DM [3] provides the information about definition of the
provenance structures and how are they divided into categories, their
properties and which of them are mandatory, while also providing
examples that show the usage of these structures.
PROV-DM [3] divides provenance structures into multiple categories, depending on their function in provenance. These categories
are [3]:
1. entities, activities, and relationships between them
2. derivations
3. agents and their relationships with entities, activities, and other
agents
4. bundles
5. alternates and specializations of entities
6. collections
1.2.1 Provenance as a graph
According to the data model, the provenance is represented as a graph
containing various types of vertices and edges. In this context, vertices
represent objects as activities, entities, or agents and edges represent
relationships between these objects. A provenance graph can be described by creating various provenance structures. Notation of these
specific structures is defined in the PROV-N [4] document, while the
data model containing their specifications is described in the PROVDM [3] document. A simple example of provenance statements representing a provenance graph can be written as:
activity(a1,
[ prov:type="company filling for bankruptcy" ])
activity(a2, [ prov:type="analyzing yearly profit" ])
wasInformedBy(c1, a1, a2)
This example presents two activities representing vertices of the
provenance graph and a communication representing the edge between these vertices. Activity with identifier a1 represents the action
6
1. Introduction to provenance
of a company filing for bankruptcy with its prov:type attribute, while
activity with identifier a2 represents the action of analyzing yearly
profit. Communication with identifier c1 represents communication
between these two activities.
Some of the possible relations in the provenance graph could be
illustrated as follows:
Figure 1.1: Simplified example of relationships and types of structures
in a high-level schema of data model [2]
1.2.2 Categories
Provenance can be represented by various types of structures as defined in the PROV-DM [3] document. PROV-DM [3] also sorts various
types of provenance structures into components that group them together based on their logical usage in provenance. The notation used
in provenance structures follows the PROV-N [4] document.
1.2.3 Entities/Activities
Category Entities/Activities covers entities, activities, and their possible mutual relationships in provenance. Relationships in this category
7
1. Introduction to provenance
include generation, usage, communication, start, end, and invalidation.
Entity
"An entity is a physical, digital, conceptual, or other kind of thing with some
fixed aspects; entities may be real or imaginary." [3] Entity is represented
as a vertex in a provenance graph. An example of an entity could be
an article in a newspaper, a webpage showing public transport usage,
or a house. Entity only contains its identifier and a list of attributes.
Notation: entity(id, [attr1=val1, ...])
Activity
An activity is something that occurs over a period of time and acts
upon or with entities, it may include processing, modifying, using, or
generating entities [3]. Activity is represented as a vertex in a provenance graph. In the context of activity, we can think of examples such
as the purchase of an entity or a processing of data. Activity can contain two special properties stating the time when the activity started
(start_time) and when it ended (end_time).
Notation: activity(id, start_time, end_time, [attr1=val1, ...])
Generation
Generation is the completion of production of an entity by an activity
[3]. Generation is represented as an edge in a provenance graph. Generation contains properties of a generated entity (entity), an activity
that generated the entity (activity), and a time of generation (time).
Notation: wasGeneratedBy(id, entity, activity, time, [attr1=val1, ...])
Usage
Usage represents the beginning of utilizing an entity by an activity
[3]. Usage is represented as an edge in a provenance graph. Usage
has properties of activity that used the entity (activity), entity that
was used (entity), and the time of usage (time).
Notation: used(id, activity, entity, time, [attr1=val1, ...])
8
1. Introduction to provenance
Communication
Communication represents the exchange of some unspecified entity by
two activities [3]. Communication is represented as an edge in a provenance graph. Communication contains properties of informed activity
(informed_activity) and informant activity (informant_activity).
Notation: wasInformedBy(id, informed_activity, informant_activity,
[attr1=val1, ...])
Start
Start represents a relationship of an activity being started by an entity [3]. Start is represented as an edge in a provenance graph. It has
properties of started activity(activity), entity that triggered the activity(trigger), activity that generated the trigger(starter), and time at
which the activity was started(time).
Notation: wasStartedBy(id, activity, trigger, starter, time, [attr1=val1,
...])
End
End represents a relationship of an activity being ended by an entity [3]. End is represented as an edge in a provenance graph. It has
properties of ended activity(activity), entity that triggered the activity(trigger), activity that generated the trigger(ender), and time at
which the activity was ended(time).
Notation: wasEndedBy(id, activity, trigger, ender, time, [attr1=val1,
...])
Invalidation
Invalidation represents the start of the destruction, cessation, or expiry
of an existing entity by an activity [3]. Invalidation is represented as an
edge in a provenance graph. properties of invalidation are entity that
was invalidated(entity), activity that invalidated the entity(activity),
and time when the entity was invalidated(time).
Notation: wasInvalidatedBy(id, entity, activity, time, [attr1=val1, ...])
9
1. Introduction to provenance
1.2.4 Derivations
Category Derivations contains a derivation provenance structure, which
allows entities to be derived from other entities [3]. Although this
category only contains one concrete structure, it also contains other
subtypes related to derivation that can be specified in the attributes of
derivation.
Derivation
A derivation is a transformation of an entity into another entity, an
update of an existing entity creating a new entity, or the construction
of a new entity based on a pre-existing entity [3]. It is represented as
an edge in a provenance graph. Derivation contains five properties,
specifically entity generated by the derivation(generated_entity), entity used by the derivation(used_entity), activity responsible for generating first two properties(activity), generation responsible for generating entity on first property by activity in third property(generation),
usage of entity in second property by activity in third property(usage).
Notation: wasDerivedFrom(id, generated_entity, used_entity, activity,
generation, usage, [attr1=val1, ...])
Derivation also has some of its subtypes defined directly in the PROVDM [3] document. These subtypes can describe derivation in a more
detailed way and therefore they can provide more context. These
defined subtypes are:
• Revision defined with attribute prov:type=’prov:Revision’
• Quotation defined with attribute prov:type=’prov:Quotation’
• Primary source defined with attribute prov:type=’prov:Primary
Source’
1.2.5 Agents, Responsibility, and Influence
Category Agents, Responsibility, and Influence is made of structures
representing agents and their relations to entities, activities, and agents.
This category also contains various subtypes that, just like in the
derivation category, are defined through attribute prov:type.
10
1. Introduction to provenance
Agent
An agent bears some form of responsibility for an activity taking place,
for the existence of an entity, or for another agent’s activity [3]. Agent
is represented as a vertex in a provenance graph. An example of an
agent could be a news agency reporter or an organization responsible
for data analytics. Similar to an entity, an agent does not possess any
special properties other than its identifier and attributes.
Notation: agent(id, [attr1=val1, ...])
Agent has some of its subtypes defined directly in the PROV-DM
[3] document. By defining such subtype we describe what kind of
agent we are using in the provenance and therefore it provides more
information. The defined subtypes of agents are:
• SoftwareAgent defined with attribute prov:type=’prov:Software
Agent’
• Organization defined with attribute prov:type=’prov:
Organization’
• Person defined with attribute prov:type=’prov:Person’
Attribution
Attribution is the assigning of an entity to an agent [3]. It is represented
as an edge in a provenance graph. Attribution bears properties stating
the entity ascribed to an agent(entity) and the agent which the entity
has been ascribed to(agent).
Notation: wasAttributedTo(id, entity, agent, [attr1=val1, ...])
Association
Association is a relationship representing the responsibility of an
agent for an activity, indicating that the agent had a role in the activity
[3]. It is represented as an edge in a provenance graph. Association
contains three specific properties, the activity that was assigned to
an agent(activity), the agent that holds the responsibility over the
activity(agent), and the plan used by the agent in the context of this
association(plan).
11
1. Introduction to provenance
Notation: wasAssociatedWith(id, activity, agent, plan, [attr1=val1,
...])
Delegation
Delegation represents an assignment of authority and responsibility
from one agent to another to carry out a specific activity as a delegate
[3]. Delegation is represented as an edge in a provenance graph. Delegation has properties containing information about the agent that
acted on behalf of other agent(delegate), the agent on whose behalf
it was acted upon(responsible), activity on which the delegation is
used(activity).
Notation: actedOnBehalfOf(id, delegate, responsible, activity [attr1=
val1, ...])
Influence
Influence is the capacity of an entity, activity, or agent to affect other
entities, activities and agents [3]. Because in this thesis an influence is
defined through other relations, it will not be described further.
1.2.6 Bundles
Bundle is a form of provenance representing provenance of provenance, therefore it can state the trustworthiness and quality of the
provenance itself.
Bundle
Bundle allows to name a part of the provenance with an identifier,
they can be also interpreted as a named graph. In the PROV-N [4]
notation, they are described as an entity.
Notation: entity(id, [ prov:type=’prov:Bundle’, attr1=val1, ...] )
1.2.7 Alternates
This category defines relations between entities through alternation or
specialization. Category Alternates contains special types of structures
that do not have identifier or attributes.
12
1. Introduction to provenance
Specialization
Specialization of an entity means that a more specific entity contains all of the aspects of a more generic entity, although it can also
contain more specific aspects [3]. Specialization is represented as
an edge in a provenance graph. Specialization contains properties
with information about specific entity(specific_entity) and general
entity(general_entity).
Notation: specializationOf(specific_entity, general_entity)
Alternate
Alternate represents two entities that present same or different aspects
of the same thing [3]. It is represented as an edge in a provenance
graph. Alternate has properties containing information about both
alternate entities(alternate1)(alternate2).
Notation: alternateOf(alternate1, alternate2)
1.2.8 Collections
A collection is an entity that has some members, these members are
also entities, and therefore their provenance can be expressed [3]. As
collections are not implemented as a part of this thesis, they will not
be addressed further.
1.2.9 Example of a provenance
The example presented below shows a provenance expressing the
creation of an article by a reporter called Ilkka.
document
default <http://default.com/>
prefix pe <http://provenanceexample.com/>
entity(e1, [ prov:type="article",
pe:headline="Food prices are rising" ])
activity(a1, -, -,
[prov:type="analyzing of food prices"])
activity(a2, 2022-04-13T11:15:00, -,
13
1. Introduction to provenance
[prov:type="writing"])
agent(ag1, [ prov:type=’prov:Person’, pe:name="Ilkka",
pe:role="reporter" ])
wasAssociatedWith(a2, ag1, -, [prov:role="author"])
wasInformedBy(a2, a1)
wasGeneratedBy(e1, a2, -, [pe:fct="publishing"])
endDocument
Firstly it is defined where the document starts and ends by keywords document and endDocument. Then the namespaces are declared
with http://default.com/ being a default namespace and
http://provenanceexample.com/ being an explicitly defined namespace
with a prefix pe. After that, seven provenance structures are created,
each representing some part of the creation of the article:
• Entity e1 representing the article about rising food prices
• Activity a1 representing analyzing of the food prices
• Activity a2 representing writing
• Agent ag1 representing reporter Ilkka
• Association representing that the reporter Ilkka was writing
• Communication representing that writing of the article was
done because of something found while analyzing food prices
• Generation representing that the article was generated by the
activity of writing
14
2 Design of the library
One of the main goals of this thesis is to analyze the already existing Python library prov 2.0.0 and then design a new library while
removing the disadvantages of prov 2.0.0.
2.1 Analysis of prov 2.0.0
Prov 2.0.0 [6] is the already existing provenance library implemented
in Python. It is currently available on the GitHub platform. In addition to its implementation, it contains various configuration, testing,
and documentation files. Implementation of provenance inside of
prov 2.0.0 library is through various classes representing provenance
records.
2.1.1 ProvBundle
Class representing a provenance bundle. ProvBundle class contains
most of the functionality of this library. This class is responsible for
adding records into the bundle, creating new records, merging of
bundles, and checking of constraints.
2.1.2 ProvDocument
ProvDocument class implemented in the prov 2.0.0 represents a provenance document. This class inherits from the ProvBundle class and it
contains records that the instance of the class has, namespaces inside
of the document, and bundles that it contains. The class also contains
methods responsible for managing its bundles.
2.1.3 ProvRecord
ProvRecord is the most generalised class of provenance records in
prov 2.0.0. It contains information about type of provenance record it
represents, bundle, identifier, and attributes. It also contains getters
and setters for its class attributes, a method to add an attribute to a
provenance record, and other helper methods like __str__ that returns
string representation of a class.
15
2. Design of the library
2.1.4 ProvElement and ProvRelation
These two classes inherit from the ProvRecord class, they represent
vertices and edges in a provenance graph. They contain no new class
attributes and their only new functionality is a method overriding the
method of their parent about a record type and the __repr__ method
returning a printable representation of the class.
2.1.5 Specific provenance records
Classes representing Entity, Activity, and Agent are child classes of
the ProvElement class. They set the prov_type class attribute, defined
in the ProvRecord class, to a value corresponding with their type.
If a user wants to create a relation between records represented
by instances of these classes, they need to call a method representing a relation that is implemented in the class itself, while providing
mandatory and optional provenance properties of those relations as
arguments. Method representing one of the relations then calls corresponding methods in the bundle that the instance of Entity, Activity, or
Agent class is a part of, where the bundle creates the relation through
its methods.
2.1.6 Disadvantages of prov 2.0.0
One of the main disadvantages of the prov 2.0.0 library is its representation of a provenance graph through a list of provenance records.
The first disadvantage with this kind of representation is that the list
does not differentiate between entities, activities, agents, and relationships between them, therefore if, for example, it is needed to check
the number of vertices, then it is necessary to filter them out of the
list. A similar problem is present if the user wants to return a list of
all edges in the graph.
Another problem caused by this type of representation of records
is that traversing through a provenance graph is complicated as vertices and edges do not have explicit information about which of their
properties are their neighbors in a provenance graph, because of that
algorithms would have to check the properties of each record and
choose the one representing a neighbor in the graph. Additionally,
vertices do not contain information about other vertices that are in
16
2. Design of the library
a relationship with them, which makes it even more complicated to
traverse a provenance graph.
Other disadvantages include a lack of type annotations and aggregation of classes with different usages to one big file, therefore making
it harder to maintain the code.
2.2 Use cases of the library
The ProvGraphLib library, which is implemented as a part of this
thesis, should support various operations with provenance structures
and records. That is why creating, retrieving, updating, and deleting
operations of provenance structures in a graph are some of the most
important parts of this library, serving as foundations of being able
to work with provenance altogether. Use cases of ProvGraphLib are
depicted in figure 2.1 .
Users should also be able to create, retrieve, update, and delete
other elements of PROV data model like bundles, namespace declarations, graphs, object representation of provenance structures, and
others. While users can interact with various parts of the library, the
implementation of the library is able to perform tasks necessary for
the provenance to be valid, including checking constraints and other
types of logical rules, like a type control of objects used by the user.
17
2. Design of the library
Figure 2.1: Use case diagram
2.3 Classes of the library
The core concept of designing the ProvGraphLib library is taking
concepts of the PROV standard and using them in the design in a
way that respects both the PROV standard and best code practices
of Python while addressing the drawbacks of the prov 2.0.0 library.
A simplified class diagram of ProvGraphLib is depicted in figure
2.2. The following subsections describe classes implemented by the
ProvGraphLib.
18
2. Design of the library
2.3.1 ProvDocument
ProvDocument represents the highest level of encapsulation of provenance in this provenance library. An instance of this class must be
created for users to be able to use all of the functionality the ProvGraphLib library provides. This class stores all the provenance stored
in the document users may want to create. All of the create, retrieve,
update, and delete operations are implemented in this class as its
methods.
Attributes:
• namespace_declarations - list of namespaces declared for this
document
• graph - provenance graph of this document
• bundles - dictionary of bundles within this document
2.3.2 Bundle
The Bundle class represents bundles in this library. They are a part
of the ProvDocument, where they provide an option to assign an
identifier to a graph. Even though Bundle class shares some parts of
the implementation with the ProvDocument class as it also contains
methods responsible for creating, retrieving, updating and deleting
structures in a graph and methods for adding and deleting namespace
declarations, they do not inherit from each other as they do not share
similar functions in the PROV standard. The Bundle class contains its
own graph of provenance and namespace declarations, but in contrast
to ProvDocument, it cannot contain bundles.
Attributes:
• id - identifier of a bundle
• namespace_declarations - list of namespaces declared inside
bundle
• graph - graph of this bundle
19
2. Design of the library
2.3.3 NamespaceDeclaration
NamespaceDeclaration is a class that is used to define a namespace.
NamespaceDeclaration contains two attributes, namely prefix and
URI, which are used to declare a namespace. The class also contains
methods for basic checking of both prefix and URI, ensuring that their
type is correct and their string representation is also valid.
Attributes:
• prefix - prefix used to identify the URI throughout ProvDocument or Bundle
• URI - URI of the object user intends to represent
2.3.4 Graphs
There are two graph classes present in the library. These two options
present the user with the possibility to create provenance through
different approaches. One of these graph types enables the user to
have more control when constructing a representation of provenance,
while also shifting the responsibility of running checks and merging
to the user, therefore allowing the user to make operations that can
create (temporarily) invalid representation of provenance. The second
graph type makes sure that the provenance graph is valid after every
operation by running checks and merges automatically. Both of these
graph classes inherit from the abstract ProvGraph class which implements the shared behavior of those two classes. Although ProvGraph
contains lists of vertices and edges present in the graph to keep track
of edges and vertices that are currently part of a graph, the graph
itself is implemented through a list of neighbors in each vertex and
neighboring vertices in each edge. Both concrete graph classes are
different only in their behavior and therefore they share the same
representation of vertices and edges.
ProvGraph attributes:
• vertices - list of vertices present in the graph
• edges - list of edges present in the graph
20
2. Design of the library
MergedRecordsGraph
MergedRecordsGraph class is a more strict representation of a provenance graph therefore it does not allow the graph to be in a state
where it would not fulfill constraints or other checks, such as checking
that all mandatory properties are present. Each provenance structure
in this graph is always represented through only one corresponding
record and adding another record representing the same structure as
is already present in the graph merges them into one structure while
keeping the information contained in both records. MergedRecordGraph automatically checks for potential merges, constraints, and
other checks to ensure that the graph contains valid provenance after
each user operation.
DividedRecordsGraph
DividedRecordsGraph represents a graph that is less strict than the
MergedRecordsGraph. Structures may be represented through more
than one record in this type of graph. It enables the user to use provenance that may be currently only partially correct or partially expressed in a way that is not in accordance with the PROV standard.
Because this class does not automatically use most of the checks after
each operation, it relies on the user to call checking functions manually.
The usage of manual checks is the reason why the users must be aware
that they must ensure the correctness of the provenance through manual calls of methods check(), check_constraints(), and merge() that are
not executed automatically in DividedRecordGraph.
2.3.5 Provenance structures
There are multiple classes representing provenance structures in the
ProvGraphLib library. Provenance structures that are defined in the
PROV-DM document are built through multiple instances of inheritance. Each layer of the inheritance has a different responsibility in
the context of being a graph structure and provenance structure at the
same time.
21
2. Design of the library
ProvStructure
ProvStructure abstract class is the most generalized type of provenance
structure in the context of this library. From the attribute perspective,
it only contains information about records that are a part of the same
structure as this information is present in all of the structure classes
that inherit from ProvStructure.
Attributes:
• prov_records - list of other records that represent the same structure
Vertex and Edge
Abstract classes Vertex and Edge divide provenance structures, through
their implementation, into vertices and edges, as classes representing
provenance structures indirectly inherit from these two classes.
Vertex holds information about other vertices that are reachable
through edges with predecessors and successors attributes, which are
both lists of tuples where the first position is a reachable vertex and
the second position is an edge through which we can reach the said
vertex in the graph.
Edge contains attributes holding information about its source vertex and target vertex, therefore setting information about its direction.
ProvId
ProvId represents an identifier in the library. It consists of a prefix and
local_name, which are both strings.
Attribute
Attribute represents a provenance attribute in a provenance structure.
It consists of a name, which is a ProvId and a string value.
22
2. Design of the library
ProvVertex, Influence, and OtherRelations
ProvVertex, Influence, and OtherRelations abstract classes represent a
presence or an absence of identifier and a list of provenance attributes
in structures inheriting from them.
ProvVertex and Influence both have attributes identifier, which is
an identification of a structure with the ProvId class, and attributes
containing a list of Attribute objects expressing a list of provenance
attributes the structure has. Their main difference is that ProvVertex
represents vertices with an identifier and provenance attributes and
Influence represents edges with an identifier and attributes.
OtherRelations class represents edges without an identifier or
provenance attributes, specifically Alternate and Specialization, and
does not have any new attributes in comparison to its parent class
Edge, it serves only as a class to differentiate itself from the Influence
class.
Specific provenance structures
The library contains many classes representing specific provenance
structures, example of such classes could be Activity or Generation
class. They inherit either from the ProvVertex, Influence, or OtherRelations class depending on their function in a graph. These specific
provenance structures are not abstract like their parent classes and
can be instantiated. Each class contains class attributes based on their
definition in the PROV-DM [3] document.
Constraints and checks
Important parts of the library are checks and constraints, both ensuring
the correctness of the provenance generated by the user. Checks verify
that the structures created are valid in terms of following definitions
set in PROV-DM [3] document, by controlling if types of properties are
correct or if all mandatory properties are present. Constraints in the
library check if the constraints defined by the PROV-CONSTRAINTS
[5] are fulfilled in the provenance graph created by the user.
23
2. Design of the library
Figure 2.2: Simplified class diagram of the main part of the library
(excluding checks, constraints, and interfaces)
24
2. Design of the library
2.4 Usage of strategy design pattern in the library
Strategy is a design pattern used to define a set of algorithms, put each
of them into a separate class, and make their objects interchangeable
[7]. In the library, the strategy pattern is used in checks and constraints.
This allows each constraint to be implemented as a separate class and
in the case of each check as a separate method, therefore allowing
an increase in ease of implementation and maintainability of the library. An example of usage of the strategy pattern in ProvGraphLib is
depicted in figure 2.3.
Even though the implementation of constraints and checks is divided into two separate strategy pattern implementations, each using
its own service class and interface, they share many similarities. The
service class stores chosen strategies and is responsible for executing
them, while the strategy interface defines a method that the service
class can use to execute any strategy as all concrete strategies implement the strategy interface. In both constraints and checks, strategy
classes (e.g. ActivityConstraints), representing each type of provenance
structure, implement a method defined by the interface. Implementations of a method defined by the interface then contain calls of methods with actual implementations of constraints or checks. Strategy is
chosen by the type of an instantiated provenance record.
Every constraint is implemented by a different class containing the
constraintCheck() method, while specific strategies combine the usage
of these methods depending on which constraints need to be checked
for the concrete provenance structure they represent. For example,
when performing CRUD operations with an instance of the Activity
class, there is only a need to check for violations of Entity Activity Disjoint and Impossible Object Property Overlap [5] constraints and there
is no need to check for other constraints violations. Unlike constraints,
checks have their implementation directly in the specific strategies
and do not have individual classes for each check.
25
2. Design of the library
Figure 2.3: Simplified class diagram of the strategy design pattern
used for constraints with an example of a strategy and a constraint
class
2.5 Differences with the prov 2.0.0
One of the main differences between ProvGraphLib and prov 2.0.0
is the provenance representation. While prov 2.0.0 represents provenance as a list of records containing only information about provenance, ProvGraphLib mainly represents the graph as lists of successors
and predecessors in the case of each vertex or a source vertex and a
target vertex in the case of each edge, while also keeping the information about vertices and edges currently present in the provenance
graph.
ProvGraphLib contains two graph types. MergedRecordsGraph
represents a provenance graph with all checks and constraints automatically used with every user operation, while DividedRecordsGraph
realizes only minimal checks automatically, the rest of them must be
manually executed by the user.
In ProvGraphLib relationships in a provenance graph are represented as classes that the user must instantiate manually through a
constructor, in prov 2.0.0 the user must call custom methods that will
create an instance of a class representing a provenance record through
a constructor in their implementation.
26
2. Design of the library
Another difference between libraries is that prov 2.0.0 classes representing records have mandatory properties, as defined by PROV-DM
[3], set as mandatory arguments in constructors or methods creating
relationships, while in ProvGraphLib all class attributes, except identifier, are optional and all mandatory properties are checked through
implemented checks, either automatically or manually, depending on
a type of a graph, while providing users of the library with an option
to create records that do not have all mandatory properties present.
27
3 Implementation of the library
Designed parts of software need to be slightly adjusted for the language that is used for its implementation of that particular software
with various best practices and other rules used for that specific language. As ProvGraphLib is implemented in Python, which has slightly
different methods of realization of object-oriented programming, for
example, the functionality of interfaces is defined either through abstract classes or protocols, compared to other programming languages
like Java or C#, it needs to be structured a little bit differently.
3.1 Realisation of the design in Python
3.1.1 Abstract classes
Abstract classes in ProvGraphLib are implemented through the abstract
base classes module. The module and its parts are imported through an
import statement and then its ABC class is used in a class definition as
a parent class, therefore setting the defined class as abstract. Example
of a definition of abstract class inside ProvGraphLib:
from abc import ABC , abstractmethod
class ProvStructure (ABC) :
Although classes become abstract by using abc they can still be instantiated. To make them uninstantiable the @abstractmethod decorator
is added to their __init__method.
3.1.2 Interfaces
Interfaces of ProvGraphLib are implemented through abstract classes
as Python does not explicitly support interfaces. Methods defined in
abstract classes acting as interfaces do not have any body and they also
contain @abstractmethod decorator to make them abstract. Example of
an interface in ProvGraphLib:
class CheckStrategy (ABC) :
28
3. Implementation of the library
@abstractmethod
def check_current (self , prov_structure :
ProvStructure , graph : ProvGraph ) :
pass
3.1.3 Provenance structures
Users of ProvGraphLib, in terms of working with provenance structures, work with their implementation in ProvGraphLib created through
multiple layers of inheritance as was already explained in the design
part of this thesis. When creating instances of classes, the user must
pass all of the objects that define the identifier, properties, and provenance attributes of the structure to the constructor of a class representing provenance structure he wants to create. The constructor method,
in Python, called __init__, then distributes arguments provided by
the user to their respective class attributes and calls the constructor
of a parent abstract class through super().__init__calls with arguments that were not used in the current constructor. Constructor of
the Activity class is defined for example as:
def __init__ (self , identifier ,
start_time ,
end_time ,
attributes ,
predecessors ,
successors ,
prov_records ) :
super () . __init__ ( identifier , attributes ,
predecessors ,
successors ,
prov_records )
self . start_time = start_time
self . end_time = end_time
Classes representing provenance structures also contain various
helper methods connecting them to the functionality of other classes
present in the library, for example, a method mapping the right properties of an edge structure to its class attributes predecessor and successor. Users can freely use these functions when creating a provenance
29
3. Implementation of the library
graph, such as check() and check_constraints allowing users to check
their structures when they create them.
3.1.4 Checks
Checks are an important part of ProvGraphLib as they control the
correctness of properties in the provenance structures in this library.
There are two types of graphs in the library and properties in the
provenance structures can be either mandatory or optional. This means
that there are only four types of checks depending on the type of a
graph and mandatoriness of a property.
Because of these four combinations of graph types and states of
properties, it was possible to put the common functionality of checks
into a static class called GeneralCheck. This class contains logic for the
four combinations of graph and states of properties in a provenance
structure and the minimal_check() method responsible for checking
rules that every property must fulfill no matter the type of graph. One
of the methods in GeneralCheck is check_divided_required() checking if a
mandatory property is correctly defined in the DividedRecordsGraph:
@staticmethod
def check_divided_required ( value : Any ,
prov_type : Type , attr_type : Type ,
attr : str ) -> bool
This method takes four arguments, the record containing the property we want to check, the type of the record, the type of the property
we want to check, and the name of the property. This method then
iterates through prov_records list of records representing the same
structure and it returns true if there is only one unique value (other
than None) for the said property.
3.1.5 Constraints
Constraint checks are called by a method implemented inside of classes
representing provenance structures, called check_constraints(). This
method is automatically called if a structure is added or updated
in MergedRecordsGraph, as these operations can violate constraints.
Users can also use this method manually if they need to check constraints without adding or updating structures in a graph. After it is
30
3. Implementation of the library
called, the check_constraints() method sets constraint strategy inside of
a ConstraintService, providing an option to execute the strategy for a
constraint check. All except four constraints are explicitly implemented
in the ProvGraphLib.
Constraints 22 and 23 are implemented indirectly by the ProvId
class and its usage in classes representing provenance structures.
Constraint 50, named typing, is one of the constraints not implemented explicitly, but typing of each of the provenance structures is
checked implicitly by the checking part of the library and various type
controls present in the other classes present in the library.
Constraint 56, named membership-empty-collection, is the second
constraint that is not implemented explicitly. This constraint is not
implemented in any way, because collections are not implemented in
the ProvGraphLib and therefore checking this constraint is irrelevant
as it cannot be violated.
3.1.6 Usage of the library
ProvGraphLib is used mainly to create provenance documents, bundles, namespaces, and provenance structures through their respective
classes and using them with the methods these classes provide.
One of the ways to start using this library is to create a list representing namespace declarations and an empty graph.
nd = [ NamespaceDeclaration (" muni ",
" Masaryks
University ") ]
graph = MergedRecordsGraph ()
Then the user can create a ProvDocument and set the arguments of
the constructor as variables containing the already created graph and
namespace declaration.
document = ProvDocument (nd , graph )
User is then ready to create a provenance structure and add it to the
graph through ProvDocument.
agent = Agent ( ProvId (" muni ", " Faculty of
Informatics ") )
document . add_structure_to_graph ( agent )
31
3. Implementation of the library
Agent is then added to the instance of MergedRecordsGraph that the
user created and they may perform other actions in the library.
3.2 Testing
Testing is a crucial part of software development and therefore cannot
be omitted from the implementation of the ProvGraphLib library. Unit
testing is used to test this library and the functionality of each of its
components. Each non-trivial method is tested by using both valid and
invalid arguments and each testing function has a name suggesting
what exactly it tests and if it is a test with valid or invalid inputs.
A good example of how tests throughout the whole testing part of
the implementation are structured would be the testing of the Alternate
class. Firstly, tests are testing the correct creation of the Alternate class.
The second set of tests tries to pass the Alternate constructor invalid
attributes and expects them to fail. The third batch of tests is testing
that changes in the class attributes will correctly replace the previous
attribute values. The fourth test part is about testing changes of the
class attributes from valid values to invalid values. Responsibility of
the last set of tests is to test if the merging of two Alternate objects gives
the expected result. Testing of merging also tests if merge() correctly
merges two provenance properties in case both of them are None,
one of them has a value and the other is None, and also when both
properties have a value.
32
4 Conclusion
The goal of this thesis was to create a new provenance library in
Python.
Firstly, in the theoretical part, it was explained what exactly the
term provenance is and how is W3C PROV standard defined. Another
essential part of this first section was to describe terms used in the
PROV standard. After getting to know the basics, documents defining the PROV standard were explained, especially the PROV-DM [3]
document as it contains the data model that was later implemented
as a part of the ProvGraphLib library. The last thing in the theoretical
chapter was a simple example of provenance.
The second part of this thesis was about designing ProvGraphLib
in the right way to enable straightforward implementation later on.
The first chapter was dedicated to an analysis of the existing prov
2.0.0 library, to understand the advantages and disadvantages of its
design. After the analysis, the designing of ProvGraphLib could begin.
Firstly, it was essential to define the use cases that this library would
implement. After the definition of use cases, a class diagram had to be
made, so a good class structure could be designed. After it was done
a comparison between prov 2.0.0 and ProvGraphLib was made.
The last part of this thesis showed how the design was transferred
into the Python language and how the user could work with the library.
At the end, a simple example of a usage of the ProvGraphLib library
was presented.
33
Bibliography
1. GROTH, P.; MOREAU, L. PROV-Overview [online]. [visited on
2023-11-22]. Available from: https : / / www . w3 . org / TR / 2013 /
NOTE-prov-overview-20130430/.
2. GIL, Y.; MILES, S. PROV Model Primer [online]. [visited on 2023-
12-11]. Available from: https://www.w3.org/TR/2013/NOTEprov-primer-20130430/.
3. MOREAU, L.; MISSIER, P. PROV-DM: The PROV Data Model [online]. [visited on 2023-11-23]. Available from: https://www.w3.
org/TR/2013/REC-prov-dm-20130430/.
4. MOREAU, L.; MISSIER, P. PROV-N: The Provenance Notation [online]. [visited on 2023-12-16]. Available from: https://www.w3.
org/TR/2013/REC-prov-n-20130430/.
5. CHENEY, J.; MOREAU, L.; MISSIER, P. Constraints of the PROV
Data Model [online]. [visited on 2023-11-23]. Available from: https:
//www.w3.org/TR/2013/REC-prov-constraints-20130430/.
6. HUYNH, Dong. prov 2.0.0 [online]. 2023-07. [visited on 2023-
12-13]. Available from: https://github.com/trungdong/prov.
original-date: 2012-11-07T10:20:33Z.
7. Strategy [online]. [visited on 2023-12-12]. Available from: https:
//refactoring.guru/design-patterns/strategy.
34
A An appendix
provenance_library.zip - zip file containing the source code of ProvGraphLib and the example.py file with an example of usage of ProvGraphLib
35